# Value Objects

Value Objects (VOs) are Java classes generated by the CRUD module to model rows of a database table or view.

All tables and views mentioned in the [Configuration File](../config/configuration-file-structure.md) are inspected
for details of their columns. Each table and view results in one class and each column of them results in
one property of the corresponding class.


## Naming of Value Objects and Their Properties

The naming of value objects is configured in the [Generator](../config/tags/mybatis-spring.md) as well as by
the [Name Solver](../config/tags/name-solver.md) rules.


## Types of the Properties

The types of the properties are decided by the [Type Solver](../config/tags/type-solver.md) rules, and in the
absence of it, by default rules according to each specific database. [Converters](../config/tags/converter.md) 
can also be configured to perform automatic conversion of data types while retrieving or saving data to 
the database.


## Customization Rules

Value objects can be customized by overriding the default genration rules using the 
[`<table>`](../config/tags/table.md) and [`<view>`](../config/tags/view.md) tags. Names, types, primary key
generation, and converters can supersede the default modeling rules.


## Enums

Static *dimension* tables can be modeled as Java enums if they are relatively small and if their data does not
change during the normal operation of the application (can change on every release). This may improve query
performance since it avoid joining the table each time. See [Enums](../config/tags/enum.md) for details.


## Value Object Modeling

This is a key concept that CRUD implements to keep the Java model in sync with the database changes seamlessly.

The CRUD module models a value object as two separate classes. A parent class that mimics the database structure
with all properties from the database and no methods for behavior, and an initially empty child class where extra
properties and methods can be added. All custom logic is concentrated in the child class, while the parent represents
the database and can be updated any time the database structure changes, without overwriting the custom behavior.
See [Value Object Modeling](./value-object-modeling.md) for more details.


